Docs: Atomic Swaps with Local Verification (#16)
ethereum/L2-interop: docs/atomic-swaps.md

# Atomic Swaps with Local Verification

> This proposal introduces a mechanism for achieving asset interoperability between Ethereum L2s (and beyond) using Atomic Swaps. The approach does not require a cross-chain messaging protocol, does not introduce new trust assumptions, and remains open and permissionless for any network to participate. It leverages an enhanced version of HTLCs (PreHTLC) in conjunction with recent advancements in local verification techniques, such as running a light client in the browser (e.g., Helios), to achieve two primary objectives:

Author: It's just a broader term, which includes the Settlement System defined in ERC-7683 as well.

- Trustless – Users should be able to transfer assets between chains without ever losing control of their funds.
- Permissionless – Networks should be able to join the protocol without approvals or gatekeepers.

## Intents with PreHTLC

PreHTLC introduces three key improvements over [traditional HTLCs](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Hash_Time_Locked_Contracts):  

- Delegated secret management – The Solver is responsible for managing secrets, reducing operational complexity for users.  
- Multiple Solver selection – Users can designate multiple Solvers to fulfill the transaction, mitigating Solver liveness risks.  
- Incentive alignment – A reward/slash mechanism ensures that Solvers are economically incentivized to execute transactions promptly.  

This document does not exhaustively cover all [edge cases](https://docs.train.tech/protocol-spec/edge-cases) and [implementation details](https://docs.train.tech) but instead provides a high-level overview of the core process.  

## Protocol Walkthrough

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram

>     participant P1 as User

Reviewer: This diagram would be clearer if Alice and Bob were separate participants

Author: I'm not sure I understand. Aren't they already separate? (P1: User, P2: Solver)

    participant SC as Source Chain
    participant P2 as Solver
    participant DC as Destination Chain

    P1->>SC: commit()
    SC-->>P2: TokenCommitted
    P2->>DC: lock()
    DC-->>P1: TokenLocked(hashlock)
    P1->>SC: addLock(hashlock)
    SC-->>P2: TokenLockAdded
    P2->>SC: redeem(secret)
    SC-->>P1: User Funds Recieved 
    P2->>DC: redeem(secret)
    DC-->>P2: Solver Funds Recieved
```

The following outlines the end-to-end execution when Alice transfers 1 ETH from Starknet to Optimism.  

### 1. Transaction initiation

- Alice accesses the Bridge dApp, connects her wallet, and selects the Starknet → Optimism transfer route.  
- The dApp queries the Solver Discovery contract to retrieve a list of available Solvers supporting the route.  
- Alice submits a commit transaction on Starknet, locking 1 ETH and specifying the set of Solvers.  

At this point, the locked funds are subject to one of two conditions:  

- A `Hashlock` is added once the auction winner is determined.  
- If no Solver successfully acts on this transaction before the `Timelock` expires, Alice can reclaim her funds.  

> ### 2. Solver selection via Dutch Auction

Reviewer: _where_ does this dutch auction take place? does it involve enshrining a particular contract on a particular chain? can a standard be defined so that different contracts of this kind can operate on the same liquidity

Author: Added a note, expanding a bit more on the auction.

> - A Dutch auction is initiated, where Solvers (e.g., Bob and John) compete by progressively lowering their bid price.  

Reviewer: if it's a dutch auction, shouldn't the price lower by itself and Bob/John interrumpt the process, setting the price?

Author: Yes, Well spotted. I completely removed the type of auction because it’s too much implementation detail.

- Bob wins the auction, generates a secret `S`, computes `Hashlock = HASH(S)`, and locks 1 ETH for Alice on Optimism.  

### 3. Local verification of the destination transaction

- The dApp performs local verification by monitoring Bob’s transaction on Optimism.  
- If a light client is available, it is utilized for validation. Otherwise, the dApp queries multiple RPC endpoints or a user-specified node.
- Upon confirming the transaction, the `Hashlock` is retrieved.  

### 4. Finalization

- Once `Hashlock` is verified, Alice signs a transaction that assigns the `Hashlock` to her previously committed funds and sets the `receiver` to Bob.  

At this stage, both chains (Starknet and Optimism) hold funds locked under the same `Hashlock`. The only remaining step is secret revelation.  

### 5. Secret disclosure and fund release

> - Bob monitors Starknet for conf irmation that the commitment is locked in his favor with the expected `Hashlock`.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Bob monitors Starknet for confirmation that the commitment is locked in his favor with the expected `Hashlock`.  
```
beware this tiny typo on the last commit :)

Author: Fixed.

- Alice accesses the Bridge dApp, connects her wallet, and selects the Starknet → Optimism transfer route.  
- The dApp queries the Solver Discovery contract to retrieve a list of available Solvers supporting the route.  
- Alice submits a commit transaction on Starknet, locking 1 ETH and specifying the set of Solvers.  

At this point, the locked funds are subject to one of two conditions:  

- A `Hashlock` is added once the auction winner is determined.  
- If no Solver successfully acts on this transaction before the `Timelock` expires, Alice can reclaim her funds.  

### 2. Solver selection via Auction

- An auction is initiated, where Solvers (e.g., Bob and John) compete for the user's request.
- Bob wins the auction, generates a secret `S`, computes `Hashlock = HASH(S)`, and locks 1 ETH for Alice on Optimism.  

> The auction is completely off-chain, and its sole responsibility is to connect the user with the best solver. The user can skip this step by directly committing to an already known or preferred solver.

### 3. Local verification of the destination transaction

- The dApp performs local verification by monitoring Bob’s transaction on Optimism.  

> - If a light client is available, it is utilized for validation. Otherwise, the dApp queries multiple RPC endpoints or a user-specified node.

Reviewer 3: It would be nice to read some security considerations regarding the verification step. In ERC-7683, I believe it is better understood since it relies on a message layer. In this case, it would be useful to understand what things could potentially go wrong.

Author: There is one scenario where a user's funds could be compromised. For this to occur, all of the following statements must be true:

- There is no Light Client for the destination network.
- Only a single RPC provider is available for that network.
- This single RPC provider is also the solver matched with the user.

Even in this case, the user still has the ability to manually verify/check the destination hashlock and decide whether they want to proceed with the transaction or not.

Reviewer 3: This is great. Could you add those as "security considerations" or similar? I think these are very relevant

### 4. Finalization

- Once `Hashlock` is verified, Alice signs a transaction that assigns the `Hashlock` to her previously committed funds and sets the `receiver` to Bob.  

At this stage, both chains (Starknet and Optimism) hold funds locked under the same `Hashlock`. The only remaining step is secret revelation.  

### 5. Secret disclosure and fund release

- Bob monitors Starknet for confirmation that the commitment is locked in his favor with the expected `Hashlock`.  
- Upon verification, Bob reveals the secret `S` on both chains, proving `HASH(S) = Hashlock`, thereby unlocking and claiming his funds while simultaneously releasing Alice's funds.  

## Standardization

The PreHTLC contracts are ownerless, immutable, and have no external dependencies. Their sole responsibility is to ensure that two parties can execute a trustless cross-chain swap. Other components—such as Auction, Discovery, dApp, and Solver—are complementary and can be customized or omitted entirely to suit different use cases.

## Conclusion

By integrating an intent/solver-based framework with PreHTLCs and local verification, this protocol achieves:  

> - Sub-30-second settlement times for cross-chain transfers.  

Reviewer 3: This sounds quite good; just to understand better, these 30 seconds are measured based on what exactly? Is there any specific checkpoint you’re referring to?

Author: It's basically the time it takes for all transactions in flow to be included in the blocks. Updated doc to reflect that.
